.TH SPEAKPDF 1 "June 2026" "speakpdf 1.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
speakpdf \- generate OPUS speech audio from text, text files, or OCR-readable PDFs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B speakpdf
.RI [ options ]
.I input
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B speakpdf
converts direct text, UTF-8 text files, or OCR-readable PDF documents into spoken OPUS audio using the OpenAI Text-to-Speech API.
.PP
For PDF input, the program reads the selectable text layer. This may come from a digitally generated PDF or from OCR software such as
.BR ocrmypdf (1).
It first attempts extraction with the Python
.B pypdf
library and falls back to Poppler's
.BR pdftotext (1).
.PP
Long documents are split into safe chunks, synthesized separately, and recombined with
.BR ffmpeg (1).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-o,\ --output " file"
Write generated OPUS audio to
.IR file .
Default:
.BR speech.opus .
.TP
.BI --voice " voice"
OpenAI TTS voice. Default:
.BR onyx .
.TP
.BI --model " model"
OpenAI TTS model. Default:
.BR gpt-4o-mini-tts .
.TP
.BI --pages " range"
PDF page range, e.g.
.BR 3 ,
.BR 3-7 ,
or
.BR 10:20 .
.TP
.BI --export-text [ file ]
Export extracted text to a UTF-8 file.
.TP
.BI --chunk-chars " number"
Maximum characters per TTS request. Default:
.BR 5500 .
.TP
.B --no-play
Do not start automatic playback with
.BR mpv (1).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B OPENAI_API_KEY
Required OpenAI API key.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B speakpdf document.pdf
Generate speech from a PDF.
.TP
.B speakpdf --pages 3-7 document.pdf
Read pages 3 through 7.
.TP
.B speakpdf --export-text extracted.txt --no-play document.pdf
Export text and suppress playback.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful completion.
.TP
.B non-zero
An error occurred.
.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
Document text is sent to the configured OpenAI speech API endpoint. Do not process confidential documents unless this is acceptable for the applicable privacy requirements.
.SH AUTHORS
Andreas Mitsis
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Andreas Mitsis.
Released under the GPLv2 License.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ffmpeg (1),
.BR mpv (1),
.BR pdftotext (1),
.BR ocrmypdf (1),
.BR python3 (1)
